<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3>V</h3>
				<p>Marie Changes Her Name</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Gay Street knew Marie no more. Twenty-second street made her acquaintance. There, in the Arundel, an apartment house which is just around the corner from Gramercy Park, Loftus secured quarters for her.</p>
			<p>These quarters, convenient for him, to her were temporary. She regarded them as a tent on the road to the slopes. Even in that light they were attractive. Though small, they were fastidiously furnished and formed what agents call a “bijou.” Loftus, who had whims which the girl thought poetic, preferred “aviary.” He preferred, too, that she should change her name. Durand seemed to him extremely plebeian. Mentally he cast about. Leroy suggested itself. It had in it an echo of France and also of old New York. As such it appealed to him and, therefore, to her. There and then Marie became known as Miss Leroy and, incidentally, very busy.</p>
			<p>Every day Annette, Juliette and Marguerite had frocks for her to try on. There were hats to go with those frocks. There was lingerie to be selected, stuffs immaterial as moonbeams, cambrics that could be drawn through a ring. In addition, there was Signor Tambourini, who was to teach her how to handle her voice, and Baron Mesnilmontant, who was to teach her to handle a horse. When she so desired she had but to telephone and in five minutes there was a victoria at the door. For her sitting-room the florist who had so disturbed Mr. Cohen fetched flowers every other day.</p>
			<p>In the flowers there were thorns, of course. Marie worried about many things, yet mainly because Mrs. Loftus had not yet “seen and learned to love her.” Against that, though, there were difficulties. At first Mrs. Loftus had a dreadful cold. Then she had gone out of town to recuperate. This was very unfortunate, but like the quarters, only temporary. Loftus assured her of that. What he said was gospel.</p>
			<p>The position in which the girl was placed worried her nevertheless. She knew it was wrong. But always she consoled herself with the belief that shortly it would be righted. On that belief she would have staked her soul. Had he not sworn it? Precisely how she would have acted had she realized that he had lied like a thief one may surmise and never know. The misery of life is the necessity of becoming accustomed to certain things. There are natures that adapt themselves more readily than others. There are also natures that cannot adapt themselves at all. Had Marie realized the truth it may be that she would have beaten her head against the walls. Yet it may also be that in the end adaptability would have come. But not happiness. Happiness consists, if it consists in anything, in being on good terms with oneself. Had Marie known the truth never could she have been that. In the circumstances it was considerate of Loftus to withhold it from her. But Loftus was a very considerate person. He hated tears, and scenes he frankly abominated.</p>
			<p>Loftus, though considerate, was vain. It was regrettable to him that he could not parade Marie about. But social New York is severe. Among its members it refuses to countenance any open disregard for what’s what. Though what occurs behind its back it is too high-bred to notice.</p>
			<p>Loftus, unable to parade Marie about, paraded her in. To the aviary he brought men, some of whom having otherwise nothing to do with this drama need not delay its recital, but, among others, he brought Annandale and Orr.</p>
			<p>Annandale, who could not keep a thing from Sylvia, told her about it. The story so shocked her that she first made a point of his not going there again and then debated whether she ought to recognize Loftus any more. In the process she confided the story to Fanny Price, who got suddenly red⁠—a phenomenon rare with her and which annoyed her very much, so much that she bit her lip, desisting only through fear of making it bleed. What is the use of spoiling one’s looks?</p>
			<p>Marie, meanwhile, rather liked Annandale. She also rather liked Orr. One evening both were bidden to the aviary. At the bidding Annandale had hesitated. He did not wish to offend Sylvia. But reflecting that she need never know, that, anyway, it was none of her business and, besides, what the deuce! he was not tied to her apron strings, was he? he concluded to go.</p>
			<p>To that conclusion he was assisted by a cocktail. At the time he was in Madison Square, where on a ground floor he occupied a set of chambers, a suite of long, large rooms, sumptuously but soberly furnished with things massive and plain. Here he lived in much luxury and entire peace, save recently when he had lost a retainer and found a burglar. The memory of that intrusion recurring, he touched a bell.</p>
			<p>A man appeared, smug and solemn, a new valet that he had got in to replace an old family servant whom an accident had eliminated.</p>
			<p>“Harris, I forgot to ask. Did you get the revolver I told you to buy?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. A 32 calibre. It is in the pantry, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Put it in the drawer of my dressing-table.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“And Harris, make me another cocktail.” As the man was leaving Annandale called after him, “Make two.”</p>
			<p>It was these that assisted Annandale to his decision. A man of means, without immediate relatives, without ponderable cares, under their influence he felt rather free to do as he saw fit. The bidding to the aviary, telephoned for him to Harris, was for that evening. Yet that evening he was also expected in Irving Place. But Marie’s invitation was for dinner, whereas he was not due at Sylvia’s until later on.</p>
			<p>It was not necessary, he told himself, to be in two places at once. He could dovetail one with another. Then presently, having dressed, he issued forth. But he had omitted to look at the evening papers. He was interested in certain stocks, and to learn what they were doing he stopped in at a neighboring club. There encountering men who asked him to drink, he accepted⁠—though how much he was on the morrow unable to recall. Yet at the time the effect of the stuff, while insidious, was not apparent. When ultimately he reached the aviary he was feeling merely fit, a feeling which the dinner increased.</p>
			<p>The dinner, perfect in itself, was perfectly served. The appointments were superior and the table a delight. Loftus when he did things did them well. Marie, in a creation of Paquin, imported by Annette, was a pleasure to behold. She had Orr at her right, Annandale at her left. Between them and Loftus were half a dozen other men. All were decorous and beautifully behaved. Except for the absence of feminine guests and one thing else, there was nothing to denote that they were not at the house of some smart young married woman. There was not a word uttered that could not have been bawled through a ballroom. There was not a suggestion not eminently discreet. In this respect only did the dinner differ from any other at which you might assist in the upper circles of New York life.</p>
			<p>During the preliminary courses stocks were the sole topic. There was a boom on in the Street. Everybody was making money, including Marie, for whom Loftus had bought a few hundred A. O. T.</p>
			<p>Orr alone had sold. “You are all mad,” he declared. “The whole city is crazy. The country is on a debauch. Bulls cannot live forever. The corridas of the Street are just like those of Spain. It is the climax that differs. There the ring is swept by a supe, here it is struck by a crisis. That crisis may come next week, next month, next year. But it will come. It can no more desert the heavens of political economy than the stars can deviate from their course. It is not here yet, the bull is very lively, he is tossing everything sky high, but just when he is at his best and fiercest, just when you are shouting yourselves hoarse, the great espada, whose name is Time, with one swift thrust will transfix him. That is the fate of bulls.”</p>
			<p>“We are to be transfixed, are we?” said Annandale.</p>
			<p>Marie looked over at Loftus. “Had I not better sell?”</p>
			<p>Orr turned to her. “No; hold on and lose. A loss, particularly a fist loss, is always a good investment. Besides, if you will permit me to say, you should have no heed of such things. No, Miss Leroy. You should content yourself with continuing to be. A woman who does only that acquires a charm almost supernatural. This was the occupation of the young goddesses of old Greece. How delightful they were! The rose was their model. They had learned the secret of its witchery. They charmed and did nothing. To charm is never easy, but to do nothing is the most difficult of all things, as it is, too, the most intellectual. Yes,” Orr added after a moment, “it is also a thing which the rest of us sadly neglect.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I say,” Loftus threw in. “It is not so long ago that I heard you maintaining that only imbeciles were idle, that everybody should have something to do. You are rather contradictory, don’t you think?”</p>
			<p>“No, not a bit; and for the reason that then I was speaking of the generality of people, and now of the exceptional few. The idleness of the imbecile is always imbecilic, but the dreams of a poet have spells that enthrall. Try to fancy a busy poet. You cannot. It is an anomaly at which the imagination balks. By the same token you cannot fancy a useful Venus. You cannot fancy Psyche occupied with anything but love. Love is⁠—or rather, should be⁠—woman’s sole occupation. The perfume of Eros should be about them all.”</p>
			<p>“The perfume of Eros!” muttered Annandale, to whom the phrase appealed. “The perfume of Eros!” he repeated and helped himself to wine. “I say, Orr, what the dickens is that?”</p>
			<p>“Only the motor force of the universe.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed. It is the sublimate of love. And love is the source of human activity. It has no other. Without it civilization would retrograde and society return to the woods. Love is the basis of tragedy, the woof of romance, the incentive of commerce, of crime too, of heroism as well.”</p>
			<p>“My!” said Marie, whom the brief deluge of words amazed. “My!”</p>
			<p>“I must get that off,” Annandale muttered. In the <i>sotto voce</i> of thought he added, “to Sylvia.” Obviously, he had had his fill. He stood up, making an excuse, imperceptibility lurching as he did so.</p>
			<p>It was after ten. Long since coffee had been served. Orr, too, got up. He thanked his hostess. The other men imitated him. Loftus and Marie were alone.</p>
			<p>Loftus went to a window. Then he turned. “Put on your hat, little girl, and we will go out; though, after all, I do not see that you need bother with a hat, unless you prefer.”</p>
			<p>“I will do as you wish, dear.”</p>
			<p>Presently they were in Lexington avenue, a moment more, in Gramercy Park. Loftus, after fumbling for his key, opened one of the little gates. Within was silence. Occasionally, from the pavement without came the sound of footsteps.</p>
			<p>Loftus and Marie seated themselves on a bench near the gate through which they had entered. Loftus was smoking. A boy passed; stopped, and sticking his nose through the railings, called: “Hi, mister, will you give me a light?”</p>
			<p>Loftus made no answer. The boy called again. “Will you? And a cigar with it?”</p>
			<p>Then he laughed and passed on. The silence increased. In the air was a fragrance, the clinging odor of the honeysuckle, the clean smell of fresh turf. Beyond, the great dim houses that front the park gave the place and the hour an accent of their own.</p>
			<p>“I like it here,” said Marie, “it is so elegant.”</p>
			<p>“Never let me hear you use that word again. It is provincial, suburban and, worse, it is shopgirl.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, dear.”</p>
			<p>“This evening I saw you eat an ice with a spoon. Never do that. Use a fork.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, dear.”</p>
			<p>Appeased by this docility, Loftus condescended to agree in turn with her. He, too, liked the park. At night, when the weather was decent, always he sat there a bit quite by himself. He had done so for years. He told her this, adding confidentially, “It is a habit.”</p>
			<p>To Marie the habit seemed most poetic. She said so, explaining that she was very fond of poetry.</p>
			<p>Loftus looked up at the stars. “The only real poetry is there. By the way, do you believe in God?”</p>
			<p>Marie, uncertain of her lover’s creeds, hesitatingly glanced at him. “Yes⁠—in a way. But I won’t, if you object.”</p>
			<p>This self-abnegation pleased Loftus. He twisted his mustache and smiled. “But no, you little goose, I don’t object in the least. On the contrary. It is right and proper that you should.”</p>
			<p>Gratified at this encouraging indulgence the girl’s hand stole into his. Then for awhile they sat and talked about nothing whatever, which, of all subjects, is, perhaps, the least disagreeable. Wearying at last even of that, they got up to go.</p>
			<p>At the gate Marie drew back. A man was passing, swaying uncertainly, arguing with himself.</p>
			<p>“Why! it is Mr. Annandale,” the girl in a frightened whisper murmured.</p>
			<p>“I wonder where he got all that liquor?” Loftus queried. “Not at Sylvia Waldron’s, I’ll wager.”</p>
			<p>“Sylvia Waldron! What a sweet name,” said Marie. “Who is she?”</p>
			<p>“The girl he is engaged to.”</p>
			<p>“Is she pretty?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, tall and dark, don’t you know. Not at all my style.”</p>
			<p>But now night had swallowed Annandale. Loftus and Marie passed on.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
