<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">A Man of Fashion</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Royal,” said the man’s mother that evening, “are you still thinking of Fanny Price?”</p>
			<p>It was in Gramercy Park. As you may or may not know, Gramercy Park is the least noisy spot in the metropolitan Bedlam. Without being unreasonably aristocratic it is sedate and what agents call exclusive.</p>
			<p>The park itself is essentially that. Its design is rather English. The use is restricted to adjoining residents. About it is a fence of high iron. Within are trees, paths, grasses, benches, great vases and a fountain. But none of the usual loungers, none of the leprous men, rancid women, and epileptic children that swarm in other New York squares. Yet these squares are open to all. To enter this park you must have a key. By day it is a playground. Nursemaids come there with little boys and girls, the subdued, undemonstrative, beautifully dressed children of the rich. At night it is empty as a vacant bier.</p>
			<p>In a house that fronted the north side Royal Loftus lived with his mother, a proud, arrogant woman socially known to all, but who socially knew but few. Behind her, in the shade of the family tree, was her dead lord, Royal’s father and, more impressively still, the latter’s relatives, the entire Loftus contingent, a set of people super-respectable, supernally rich. She too was rich. She wore a wig, walked with a staff, spoke with a Mayfair intonation in a high-pitched voice, and, in the amplitudes of widowhood and wealth, entertained frequently but cared only for her son.</p>
			<p>On this evening the two were seated together in a drawing-room that faced the park. The walls, after a fashion of long ago, were frescoed. The ceiling too was frescoed. The furniture belonged also to an earlier day. The modern note in the room was the absence of chandeliers and the appearance of Royal Loftus, who, in a Paris shirt and London clothes, was contemplating his painted nails.</p>
			<p>At his feet was an Ardebil rug which originally had cost a small fortune and now was worth a big one. In allusion to it a girl to whom he had handed out the usual “You don’t care for me,” had retorted, “Not care for you! Why, Royal, I worship the rug you tread on.”</p>
			<p>That girl was Fanny Price.</p>
			<p>“No,” he answered in reply to his mother’s question. The answer was strangely truthful. Fanny Price had tantalized him greatly. Semi-continuously he had thought of her for a long time. But not matrimonially. To him matrimony meant always one woman more and usually one man less. He had no wish to dwindle. When he was fifty he might, perhaps, to make a finish, marry some girl who wanted to begin. But that unselfishness was remote. He was quite young; what is worse, he was abominably good-looking. Fancy Aramis in a Piccadilly coat. That was the way he looked. His features were chiseled. On his lip was a mustache so slight that it might have been made with a crayon. His hair was black. His eyes were blue. Where they were not blue they were white, very white. They were wonderful eyes. With them he had done a great deal of execution.</p>
			<p>At the time they rather haunted a young woman who moved in another sphere and whose acquaintance he had made quite adventurously. The name of this young woman was Marie Durand. It was of the latter, not of Fanny Price, that he was thinking.</p>
			<p>“No,” he repeated. “But was it for Annandale that you asked her for tonight?”</p>
			<p>“How perfectly absurd of you, Royal. Have you forgotten that he is in love with Sylvia? I asked her partly for you, partly for Orr.”</p>
			<p>“Is he coming too! Good Lord! it is going to be ghastly.”</p>
			<p>But at the side of the room a portière was being drawn and a servant announced:</p>
			<p>“Miss Waldron.”</p>
			<p>With the charming manner of the thoroughbred New York girl a young woman entered. She was tall, willowy, with a face such as those one used to see in keepsakes⁠—delightful things which now, like so many other delightful things, are seen no more.</p>
			<p>As she approached Mrs. Loftus, who had risen to greet her, she made a little courtesy.</p>
			<p>“Sylvia, this is so dear of you. And is your mother very well?”</p>
			<p>Again the portière was drawn. A voice announced:</p>
			<p>“Miss Price.”</p>
			<p>Then there appeared a girl adorably constructed⁠—constructed, too, to be adored. She was slight and very fair. Her mouth resembled the red pulp of some flower of flesh. Her eyes were pools of purple, her hair a turban of gold.</p>
			<p>Cannibalistically Loftus looked the delicious apparition up and down. He could have eaten it.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Annandale,” the voice announced.</p>
			<p>A man, big and blond, with a cavalry mustache and an amiable, aimless air, strolled in.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Melanchthon Orr.”</p>
			<p>On the heels of Annandale came a cousin of Miss Waldron, a lawyer by trade, a man with a bulldog face that was positively attractive.</p>
			<p>There were more how-do-you-do’s, the usual platitudes, interrupted by the opening of doors at the further end of the room, where a butler, a squad of lackeys behind him, disclosed himself in silent announcement of dinner.</p>
			<p>After the general move which then ensued and hosts and guests were seated at table, Orr created an immediate diversion by calling to Fanny Price and telling her that shortly she was to marry.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he continued, “and my cousin Sylvia is to marry also, though not so soon; but either Annandale or Royal will never marry at all.”</p>
			<p>Bombarded by sudden questions Orr gazed calmly about.</p>
			<p>“How do I know? Miranda told me. Miranda the spook. She charged five dollars for the information. If you like to make it up to me, I shall not mind in the least. On the contrary. You see, Mrs. Loftus,” Orr added, turning to his hostess, “I happened, when I went to her, to have your very kind invitation for this evening in my pocket, and, as she wanted something to psychometrize, I gave her that. She held it to her forehead and said, ‘I see you in the house of an elegant lady’⁠—that is you, Mrs. Loftus; yes, there is no doubt about it⁠—‘and there are present two young ladies, one fair, one dark, and two gentlemen; one of the gentlemen will never marry, but the dark young lady will marry in two years and the fair young lady in one. Five dollars. Thank you. Next.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Did she say nothing about me except that I am an ‘elegant lady’?” Mrs. Loftus, with a pained laugh and a high voice, inquired.</p>
			<p>“Did she say whom I am to marry?” Fanny Price asked, smiling, as she spoke, at Royal.</p>
			<p>“But, Melanchthon, surely you do not believe in these things?” said Sylvia gravely.</p>
			<p>“Of course he does not,” Loftus exclaimed. “He does not believe in anything. Do you, Orr?”</p>
			<p>“I believe in a great many things,” the lawyer replied. “I have precisely three hundred and sixty-five beliefs⁠—one for every day in the year.”</p>
			<p>“When the twenty-ninth of February comes around how do you manage then?” said Fanny.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Annandale, “and how about April first?”</p>
			<p>Orr raised a finger. “Jest if you will. But beliefs are a great comfort, or would be among people like you who have none except in fashion, and there is the oddity of it, for belief in this sort of thing is very fashionable now, particularly in London. Yes, indeed, Lady Cloden⁠—you remember her, she was Clara Hastings⁠—well, she went to a spook in Tottenham Court Road, and the spook told her that she would have twins. Immediately she had herself insured. In London, you know, you can be insured against anything. The twins appeared and she got £5,000. Belief in this sort of thing is therefore not merely fashionable but convenient.”</p>
			<p>In the ripple of laughter which followed the logic, Orr turned to Mrs. Loftus, Annandale to Miss Waldron, Loftus to Fanny Price.</p>
			<p>“You take very kindly to snubbing, don’t you?” said the latter.</p>
			<p>“I?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, pooh! The other day I saw Mr. Royal Loftus trying to scrape acquaintance with a young person in the street. I never laughed more in my life. She would not look at you. Is that sort of thing amusing? Why don’t you take a girl of your size?”</p>
			<p>Loftus looked into Fanny’s eyes. “If you want to know, because you are all so deuced prim.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” and Fanny made a tantalizing little face, showing, as she did so, the point of her tongue. “Now tell me, what makes you think so?”</p>
			<p>Across the table Annandale was talking to Sylvia Waldron. His manner was rather earnest, but his utterance had become a trifle thick.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Arthur,” the girl at last interrupted him. “Don’t drink any more. You have had five glasses of champagne already.”</p>
			<p>Heroically Annandale put his glass down. “Since you wish it, I won’t. But it does not hurt me. I can stand anything.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid it may grow on you.”</p>
			<p>Annandale laughed. “Grow on me,” he repeated. “I like that. Why, I am cultivating it.”</p>
			<p>Miss Waldron laughed too. “Yes, but you know you must not. I won’t let you.” Then at once, with that tact which was part of her, she changed the subject. “Doesn’t Fanny look well tonight?”</p>
			<p>“Very. She is the prettiest girl in New York. But you are the best and the dearest. What is more, you are an angel.”</p>
			<p>“To you I want to try to be.”</p>
			<p>“Only,” resumed Annandale with a spark of the wit which is born of champagne, “don’t try to be a saint⁠—it is a step backward.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Mrs. Loftus,” Orr was saying, “Miranda is fat, very fat. All mediums are. The fatter they are the more confidence you may have.”</p>
			<p>Then there was more small talk. Courses succeeded each other. Sweets came and went. Presently Mrs. Loftus looked circuitously about and slowly arose. When she and the girls had gone and the men were reseated Loftus turned to Orr.</p>
			<p>“Did the spook say anything else?”</p>
			<p>Orr was selecting a cigar from a cabinet on wheels which a servant trundled about. He chose and lighted one before he replied. Then he looked at Loftus.</p>
			<p>“Yes, she told me that she saw⁠—” Orr paused. The cigar had gone out. He lighted it again. “She told me that she saw death hereabouts.”</p>
			<p>Loftus was also lighting a cigar. “Then I too am a spook,” he replied. “I foretold that you would say something ghastly.”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear fellow,” Orr rejoined, “truth is always that. People fancy that it is made of lace and pearls like a girl on her wedding day. It is not that at all. It is just what you call it. It is ghastly. Read history. Any reliable work is but a succession of groans. The more reliable it is the more groans there will be.”</p>
			<p>Annandale, who had been helping himself to brandy, interrupted. “Talking of reading things, I saw somewhere that after some dinner or other, when the women had gone, a chap began on a rather⁠—well, don’t you know, a sort of barnyard story and the host, who could not quite stomach it, said: ‘Suppose we continue the conversation in the drawing-room?’ So, Royal, what do you say? If Orr is going to shock us, suppose we do.”</p>
			<p>Loftus with a painted fingertip flipped the ashes from his cigar.</p>
			<p>“I fear that I have lost the ability to be shocked, but not the ability to be bored.”</p>
			<p>Yet presently, after another cigar and conscious perhaps that Fanny Price, though often exasperating, never bored, he returned with his guests to the drawing-room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
