<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: Two in a Turret</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Two in a Turret</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>From a back gallery of the Casino a narrow stair leads to a tower. Up that stair Annandale one afternoon invited Fanny Price.</p>
			<p>A fortnight had gone, two weeks of dressing and undressing, of dinners, dances and dips; a succession of mellow mornings; long, green afternoons, dusks stabbed by sudden stars and nights lit by a moon that painted the ocean, penetrated the shadows, checkered the underbrush with silver spots.</p>
			<p>But now, though the mornings were as mellow and the afternoons as green, though in the air the same madness subsisted and the nights were as languid as before, verandas were emptying, there were wide spaces where once were thick crowds. The end of the season had come.</p>
			<p>In the procession of these things Annandale had put the North Woods from him; he had put, too, the thought of journeying abroad. With them he had put also any hope that Sylvia would signal him back.</p>
			<p>For awhile the hope had persisted, as the light of a candle persists. Then it had dwindled, flickered and sunk. That is the way with hope. Though sometimes it is snuffed. You are in darkness. But through that darkness occasionally another light will be upheld. It may not, perhaps, be intended for you, but it may enable you to see.</p>
			<p>Aided by another light, Annandale had begun to discern his way. He should, of course, have remained in darkness. To darkness, were this fiction, he would be condemned. But this is not fiction. The drama with which these pages deal is documented from life. It was Fanny who held the light.</p>
			<p>During the month that had gone he had been almost constantly at her side. The fact that one light may be replaced by another had not at first occurred to him. Presently the ease with which such substitution can be effected had mystified him very much. He was not prepared for anything of the kind. He had arranged to be a gloomy, disappointed man. He kept telling himself that if Sylvia had stuck to him he would have been true to her his whole life through. But she had not stuck to him, and the withdrawal of herself had left existence so empty that, unknown even to him, Nature had been filling the vacuum which she abhors.</p>
			<p>In this, Nature had been greatly aided. Fanny Price was a remarkably fetching young girl. To a man out of court and consequently out of sorts the companionship of a pocket Venus is tonifying in the extreme. It is not merely that, it is recuperative. It banishes the blues. It establishes a new court, and with it a new code of its own.</p>
			<p>The censorious allege that this is all wrong. It may be that they are right. But Nature is not censorious. Nature is not even ethical. She has no standards of right, no canons of wrong. What she does have is her way. A saint may defy her. Annandale was not that by a long shot. He was simply a human being, one that had been punished, and, as he thought, unjustly punished, for that which might have been condoned. Injustice humiliates. Saints may welcome humiliation, but human beings resent it.</p>
			<p>Over the emptiness which Sylvia had created there brooded therefore two things. One was darkness, the other pique. In the light which Fanny upheld it seemed to Annandale that they might be dispersed. This idea, which he regarded as his very own, and consequently as highly original, was not his in the least. It was Nature prompting him to fill the vacuum which she so dislikes.</p>
			<p>Instigated by her, Annandale invited Fanny up a stair and into a tower, a place remote, aloof, furnished with seats for just two.</p>
			<p>Fanny had not been there before. She had heard, though, of its aloofness; it was regarded as a dangerous spot. But Fanny was a brave girl. Besides, Annandale was at his worst, and even at his best was not very alarming.</p>
			<p>The ascent effected, Fanny peeped from a casement. “Why,” she exclaimed, “you can see everywhere!” She looked about. “But no one can see you.”</p>
			<p>Assured of that, she produced a little gold box. On the back were her initials in jewels. She opened it, took a cigarette and lit it. “Will you have one?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“This is a deuced nice case,” said Annandale.</p>
			<p>Fanny puffed and smiled.</p>
			<p>“A present, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. But you must not ask from whom.”</p>
			<p>Annandale looked out at the landscape, then in at the girl. “There is something else I want to ask.”</p>
			<p>So grave was his tone that Fanny deployed for action.</p>
			<p>“Will you marry me?”</p>
			<p>Though Fanny had deployed, the shot bowled her over. Into one of the chairs she dropped. Already Annandale had captured the other.</p>
			<p>“Will you?”</p>
			<p>But Fanny was recovering. With an air of vexation in which there was amusement, she puffed at her cigarette and then at him.</p>
			<p>“Now, honestly, have I ever given you the slightest encouragement to ask me that?” She hesitated a moment, puffed again and added: “We have been friends, I think; let us remain so.”</p>
			<p>Annandale, who was in loose white flannels, contemplated his tight white shoes. Then his eyes sought hers. “Are you interested in Loftus?”</p>
			<p>“That is none of your business,” Fanny proudly and promptly replied. As she spoke she got from her seat, approached the casement, gazed out and away.</p>
			<p>“I do not believe you are,” Annandale announced to her slender waist. “But if I am wrong, it is hardly disloyalty to him to say that he is not good enough for you.”</p>
			<p>Beneath the tower was a tennis court. Fanny made a face at it. But the face must have been insufficient. Looking over her shoulder at Annandale, she showed her teeth.</p>
			<p>“Do you fancy a girl cares for a man because he is or is not good enough? When a girl cares she cares because she cannot help herself.”</p>
			<p>“I know that is the way with a man, or at least with me. I cannot help caring for you.”</p>
			<p>“Nor could you help caring for Sylvia.”</p>
			<p>“She is so different.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Fanny dreamily, “and so are you.” Though to whom she referred she did not say, nor did Annandale ask. She gave him no chance. “Next month you will not be able to help caring for some other girl.”</p>
			<p>“Not if you would take me.”</p>
			<p>“But, you see, I don’t care for you.”</p>
			<p>“But couldn’t you?” Annandale persisted. “Couldn’t you if you tried? Of course, in saying that Loftus is not good enough for you I don’t mean that I am. But if you could try I would.”</p>
			<p>At this program Fanny laughed. “We should be a pair of Christian Endeavorers, shouldn’t we?”</p>
			<p>To the levity of that Annandale found no immediate reply. Yet presently, with an irrelevance more obvious than real, he threw out: “He has gone abroad, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Who? Loftus?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, for a year, I believe.”</p>
			<p>Fanny turned to the tennis court again. It was, though, not that which she saw, but a hope that was slipping away, sinking away, sinking down into death dishonored. For a moment she was very still. A movement of Annandale’s aroused her.</p>
			<p>“Come,” she said. “It is hot here. Let us go.”</p>
			<p>Gathering a fold of her skirt, Fanny descended the stair. Annandale filed after. On a balcony below a lady with faded hair and gimlet eyes pounced at her.</p>
			<p>“I have been hunting for you everywhere,” the lady exclaimed. “Aren’t you going to dress?” Then she nodded to Annandale.</p>
			<p>Annandale touched his cap. “How do you do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price?”</p>
			<p>He would have lingered, but Fanny dismissed him.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye,” she said. “I may see you this evening.”</p>
			<p>As he ambled off <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price returned to the charge. “Where have you been?”</p>
			<p>Fanny patted a yawn. “Listening to sweet nothings.”</p>
			<p>“From him? Why, he hasn’t anything, has he? What did you do?”</p>
			<p>Fanny patted another yawn or else another sigh. “I fell on his neck and sobbed for joy.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense. Has he anything, tell me?”</p>
			<p>“Not enough to entertain on. Twenty-five thousand a year, I think.”</p>
			<p>“The impertinence of it!” said the lady.</p>
			<p>Had her daughter been an heiress a duke would hardly have satisfied her. As things were, or more exactly, since the girl began to grow in beauty she had dreamed for her but one dream⁠—a brilliant match. To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price there could be no brilliance if the party of the second part had a dollar less than ten million.</p>
			<p>“You might have had Loftus,” she declared at last. “Where is he, do you know?”</p>
			<p>“Abroad, I hear.”</p>
			<p>“With that creature?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price in common with many others had heard of Marie Leroy. But though others in hearing had not heeded, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price took it as a personal affront.</p>
			<p>“Then it is your fault,” she snarled. “You could have had him if you had wanted. Don’t tell me. He was in love with you. I could see it.”</p>
			<p>Fanny was looking at the ocean. A white sail was fainting in the distance. Like it, a hope she had had was fading away. She watched it go. It had been very fair, very dear, more dear and fair than any she had known. But it was going. It was out of reach and now out of sight. She could not beckon to it.</p>
			<p>“What are you staring at?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price asked.</p>
			<p>“A sail out there,” the girl answered.</p>
			<p>Then presently mother and daughter passed into an adjoining corridor where they had rooms.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
