<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Mote in the Eye</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>A philosopher has noted that at certain periods a great many stupid people have a good deal of stupid money. This condition, describable as plethora, is succeeded by another catalogued as panic.</p>
			<p>The number of stupid people who at this time stalked the streets unchecked was phenomenal. Among them was Annandale. It was not a beggarly twenty-five thousand a year that he had, but fifty, with, in addition, more to come. This, though measurably satisfactory, was not brilliant. Not brilliant, that is, as Mrs. Price used that term. Still it was sufficient to remove him from the menagerie of paupers in which she had classed him. Assured whereof, Mrs. Price, pocketing further objections, gave in. Two months by the clock after the episodes at Narragansett she assisted at his marriage to her daughter. A little later Annandale took a house in Gramercy Park.</p>
			<p>This house, leased fully furnished from November to June, Fanny selected. She liked the neighborhood. Annandale, whose bachelor quarters had, of course, been given up, liked it too. It was convenient. He had got an idea that he ought to have something to do. The something which he hit on consisted in going downtown every day and standing, in a broker’s office, over a ticker. Such were the quantities of stupid money afloat that the ticker was very loquacious. It talked and talked, generally in jumps. As it jumped Annandale bought. As it continued to jump, he made. Whereupon he regarded himself as a born financier. It was an illusion which that year very many men shared.</p>
			<p>But the illusion was agreeable to him. It was equally so to Fanny. It took him out of the way and induced pleasant dreams. He talked of drags and yachts. On fifty thousand a year these things are impossibilities. But Annandale, believing himself a born financier, believed, too, that the day was not remote when they would solidify into facts. Pending which, Fanny, from her own carriage, distributed to Annette, Juliette and the rest of them such orders as she liked.</p>
			<p>It was in this carriage that Marie had seen her with Loftus. Others also saw her. Fanny being a little more than a bride and Loftus a good deal more than a beau, the spectacle caused comment. There were, though, other things that the future had in charge which were to cause more. But among those who beheld the particular spectacle was Fanny’s husband.</p>
			<p>Annandale was in a hansom with Mr. Skitt, the broker in whose office he looked over the tape. As Fanny drove by, Annandale raised his hat, then, with a mimic which he meant to be humorously indignant, he shook his stick at Loftus much as though he were saying, “Aha! making up to my wife!”</p>
			<p>Loftus entering into the spirit of the jest, ducked his head in feigned alarm.</p>
			<p>“That’s a deuced pretty woman,” remarked Mr. Skitt when the carriage had passed.</p>
			<p>“It is Mrs. Annandale,” his client returned with some hauteur.</p>
			<p>“Oh, beg pardon, I didn’t know.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Annandale resumed, “and that was Loftus, an old friend of mine.”</p>
			<p>“Any relation to <em>the</em> Loftus?” Mr. Skitt, glad that the subject was out of the way, inquired.</p>
			<p>“He is <em>the</em> Loftus,” Annandale, now entirely mollified, replied.</p>
			<p>Others, however, took the spectacle less lightly. To Marie it was distressing. To Mrs. Price it was absurd. Mrs. Price had not seen it, but she heard of it. To air a few views on the subject she pounced in on Fanny the very next day. Loftus, however, was there at the time. She had to wait until he was gone. Then she let drive.</p>
			<p>“Do you fancy,” she asked fiercely, “that this is London? Do you?” she repeated and menacingly pulled off a glove. “Don’t you know that you cannot have men hanging about you, and of all men that man? Great heavens, if you wanted him you should have taken him at the start.”</p>
			<p>Fanny lit a cigarette, made a ring of smoke, poked a finger through it and in a sugary, demure little way which she sometimes affected, answered serenely: “At the finish perhaps I may yet.”</p>
			<p>“What!” cried Mrs. Price.</p>
			<p>But from the door a servant was announcing Miss Waldron. The girl swam in. Necessarily, for the time being, the subject was dropped. Later Mrs. Price got back to it, but without notable result, without obtaining either any elucidation of Fanny’s rather curious remark.</p>
			<p>That though, with graver things, the future had in charge. Meanwhile Fanny, with nine servants and a housekeeper to run them, led the life of any other young society woman, the life of an <i xml:lang="fr">objet de luxe</i>.</p>
			<p>This form of existence would have been quite to her liking if⁠—Yet is there not always an If? A poet declaimed on the subject two thousand years ago. Times have changed, customs with them, but not the human heart. Barring great wealth and its fanfares and accompaniments, Fanny had enough to throw the average woman into stupors of envy, enough also to even satisfy her, if only instead of one man she had married another. Annandale was very nice. He had but one defect. But that defect was fatal. He did not happen to be somebody else.</p>
			<p>This defect Fanny had fancied that she could overlook. She was young, therefore ignorant, and, in fancying that she could ignore that fatal defect, fancied also that she had the ability to order herself about, to command her nature and dictate to her heart. The fallacy is common. Many of us have entertained it and kept at it too until the discovery is made that the heart is a force which we must yield to or break.</p>
			<p>Fanny became aware of this shortly after Loftus returned. There in her existence was the If. As a consequence, although Annandale was quite perfect to her, his perfection was as nothing to his one defect.</p>
			<p>Of this defect Annandale was wholly unconscious. Yet, though he could not see the mote in his own eye, there was one in Fanny’s which, though he saw, he was unable to define. It is true on the mote question he was not an expert. A husband, particularly when he happens to be big and blond, seldom is. Then, too, the effect of the mote was odd. It affected Fanny’s disposition. When he approached her he could not but notice that she became elusive. He could not but perceive that she was as afraid of a kiss as of a bee.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter with you?” he inquired on one occasion when she appeared even more tantalizingly intangible than he had seen her yet.</p>
			<p>“Women are the very devil,” he muttered as, without answering, she moved yet further away.</p>
			<p>The question, though, was very unreasonable. So at least Mrs. Price, whom he tried to take into his confidence, assured him with fine scorn. “The idea of a man asking his wife what is the matter with her!” she exclaimed. “A man ought to know. If he doesn’t, how in the world can he expect her to?”</p>
			<p>But that was before the episode with Loftus in the Park. Had Annandale gone to Mrs. Price then she would have been quite capable of putting a flea in his ear. That opportunity he neglected. Stocks were soaring. On paper he was making money hand over fist. He had no time to bother with women’s whims. When men do have time for such things the time has passed.</p>
			<p>Even then it had gone. One night early in May Fanny had a few people in, among whom were Loftus and Sylvia Waldron.</p>
			<p>Sylvia, who long since had let bygones be bygones, was now as sisterly as ever with Fanny, and with Annandale on terms friendly and frank, an attitude which, as Fanny put it, “made it so easy, don’t you know, all around.” Yet then in putting it in that way Fanny may have been actuated by the fellow-feeling which makes us all so wondrous kind. With Loftus she was rather friendly herself.</p>
			<p>That, however, by the way. During the dinner a telegram was brought to Annandale. It concerned the morrow’s market and interested him considerably. As soon as he decently could he got away to confer with Skitt. Later the other guests began to go. But Loftus lingered. Presently he and Fanny were alone.</p>
			<p>“How is the lady?” Fanny negligently inquired.</p>
			<p>Her arms and neck were bare. Her dress, immaterial as cobwebs, was of starbeams’ restful hue. About her throat was a string of opals. They were colorful, though less so than her eyes and mouth.</p>
			<p>She was seated on a sofa. Loftus was standing. As always, he was superiorly sent out. Other men who got their things at the same places that he got his never succeeded, however they tried, in appearing half so well.</p>
			<p>“Do you know,” Fanny continued, “she has improved vastly since that day when I saw you trying to pick her up. How did you ever manage? Tell me.”</p>
			<p>Loftus, his hands in his pockets, shrugged a shoulder.</p>
			<p>“And she is so delightfully disdainful,” Fanny ran on. “In Central Park this afternoon she turned up her nose at me. It is a very pretty nose, Royal, did you know that?”</p>
			<p>“I know that it is a bit out of joint,” Loftus condescended at last to reply.</p>
			<p>“Dear me! Fancy that! But then the course of true love never did run smooth.”</p>
			<p>Loftus assumed an air of great weariness. “Do drop it,” he said. “You know very well that I have never cared for anyone but you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course,” Fanny promptly and pleasantly retorted. “I may have had a doubt or two about it. But when you put this lady in a flat around the corner, then, naturally, you convinced me. It was a rather circuitous way, though, to go at it, don’t you think?”</p>
			<p>Beside her on the sofa Loftus flopped. “Why do you always go back to that?” he asked, with the same affectation of weariness.</p>
			<p>Fanny turned from him. “I don’t seem to be able to get away from it,” she answered, but less promptly and pleasantly than before. Her fair face had grown serious. From her eyes the bantering look had gone. “Besides,” she added after a moment, “you took her to Europe, and that did seem a trifle steep.”</p>
			<p>“Would you like her to go back there?” Loftus tentatively inquired.</p>
			<p>In and out from Fanny’s skirt a white slipper, butterflied with gold, moved restlessly. “I should have preferred that you had let her alone. It was not nice of you. It was not nice at all.”</p>
			<p>From him she had turned to the carpet. She was looking at it still. “I wonder,” she presently resumed, “if you ever suspected how it hurt me.” Pausing a bit she looked up. “But you have been so dense, Royal.”</p>
			<p>Loftus was about to interrupt. She checked him. “The first time I saw you I was just fifteen. That is eight years ago. Since then I can honestly say that until I accepted Arthur I had never thought of anyone but you. Never. Not once. Can you realize now how this affair of yours affected me? It hurt. If it had not been for that, do you suppose I would have taken the prince in the fairy tale? You were my prince.”</p>
			<p>“But,” Loftus protested, “this affair, as you call it, came about only <i xml:lang="fr">faute de mieux, faute de toi</i>. Why cannot I⁠—why cannot we⁠—?”</p>
			<p>Fanny checked him again. “No, we cannot. Two years ago you said the same thing to me. I forgave you then because I loved you. For the same reason I forgive you now. But, however I care for you, never will I be your mistress.”</p>
			<p>“Fanny⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, never. If, as again and again you have told me during the past few months, you still care for me, either you must love me openly or I will not permit you to love me at all.”</p>
			<p>At the sudden horizon Loftus bent to her. “Let us go, then. In Europe we can love before all the world.”</p>
			<p>Fanny drew back. “Particularly before all the half-world,” she answered with a sniff. “No. You misunderstand me. Perhaps, too, I misunderstand you. Let my hand be.”</p>
			<p>“Fanny, I will do anything⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is rather late to say that. But if I were free now, what would you do? Would you repeat the invitation you have made?”</p>
			<p>Loftus, his wonderful eyes looking deep into hers, answered quickly and sweetly, “I would beg you to be my wife.”</p>
			<p>Fanny straightened herself. “Then give that girl her congé, give her a dot too, send her abroad and let her marry some count.”</p>
			<p>“Very good, I will do so.”</p>
			<p>“When you have,” said Fanny, “I will ask Arthur for a divorce.”</p>
			<p>“What?” And Loftus, with those wonderful eyes, stared in surprise. He was in for it, let in for it, was his first impression. Yet at once, on looking back, <ins title="Original has her">he</ins> realized that Fanny was incapable of trick of any kind. “But,” he objected, “supposing he refuses?”</p>
			<p>“Then I will apply.”</p>
			<p>“But you can’t, you see. He is good as gold.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t mean here. I mean out West.”</p>
			<p>For a moment Loftus said nothing. Even in the West, he reflected, divorce took time. Yet then, reflecting, too, that it would be very gentlemanly of Annandale were he to go there and leave the coast free for him, he smiled and remarked, with what seemed astounding inappositeness, “I have been selling short.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Fanny longly. “And what of it?”</p>
			<p>“Unless the market turns I shall be out, God knows how much!”</p>
			<p>“But what of it?” Yet even as she spoke she understood. “Fiddlesticks!” she exclaimed with a gesture of annoyance. “I sha’n’t care if you haven’t two cents.”</p>
			<p>To this Loftus had no chance to reply. Annandale came lounging in.</p>
			<p>“Do you know what I have done?” he collectively and blandly inquired. “I told Skitt to buy me, at the opening, 1,000 Atchison and 1,000 Steel. Now I would like a quiet drink.”</p>
			<p>Loftus stood up. “I am going in the Park for a quiet smoke. But I thought you had sworn off.”</p>
			<p>Annandale tugged at his cavalry mustache and laughed. “I haven’t touched a thing for nearly a year. But on a night like this, when the whole town is mad, I think I might have a drop. Stop, dear boy, won’t you, and have one with me? No? Well⁠—” And, accompanying Loftus to the door, he whispered to him there, “My compliments to Miss Leroy.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t forget, Royal,” Fanny called after him, “that you dine with us on the ninth.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
