<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3>X</h3>
				<p>The Verdict</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the days of the Doges there was a Gold Book in which the First Families of Venice shone. In New York there is also a Gold Book, unprinted but otherwise familiar. The names that appear there have earned the cataloguing not from medieval prowess, but from money’s more modish might.</p>
			<p>At the Metropolitan Opera House, two years and a fraction after the trial, the Gold Bookers were on view⁠—men who could have married the Adriatic, dowered her too, whose signatures were potenter than kings. There also were women fairer than the young empresses of old Rome, maidens in thousand-dollar frocks, matrons coroneted and tiaraed. On the grand tier they sat, a family-party air about them, nodding to each other, exhaling orris, talking animatedly about nothing at all. Into their boxes young men strolled, lolled awhile, sauntered away.</p>
			<p>In one of these boxes was Sylvia, looking like an angel, only, of course, much better dressed. Behind her was Annandale. They were quite an old couple. They had been married fully a year. In the box with them was Orr.</p>
			<p>On the stage a festival was in progress, a festival for ear and eye, the apogee of Italian art, a production of “Aïda.” A quarter of a century and more ago when that opera was first given in Cairo, there was an accompanying splendor more lavish than it, or any other opera, has had since. But it was difficult to fancy that even then there was a better cast. Before the tenor had completed the opening romanza he had enthralled the house. Good-looking, as tenors should be, stout as tenors are, he suggested Mario resurrected and returned.</p>
			<p>“Celeste Aïda!” he sang, and it was celestial. Then at once Amneris, enacted by a debutante, appeared and the house was treated to what it had not had since Scalchi was in her prime, a voice with a conservatory in the upper register, a cavern in the lower and, strewn between, rich loops of light, of opals, flowers, kisses and stars.</p>
			<p>Princess she was and looked, yet, despite the glory of her raiment, rather a princess in a drawing-room than the daughter of a Pharaoh in a Memphian crypt. She seemed pleased, sure of her charm, and she pleased and charmed at sight. The house, the most apathetic⁠—save Covent Garden⁠—in the world, and, musically, the most ignorant as well, rose to her.</p>
			<p>Sylvia turned to Orr. In his gloved hand was a program. “What a dear!” she murmured. “Who is she?”</p>
			<p>Orr, before answering, looked at Annandale. The latter’s eyes were on the roof. He may have been drinking the song, unconscious of the singer. But it is more probable that his thoughts were elsewhere, though hardly in the Tombs, where, during his relatively brief sojourn, he had lived at the relatively reasonable rate of a hundred dollars a day.</p>
			<p>“A debutante,” Orr answered. “She is billed as Dellarandi.”</p>
			<p>The curtain fell. The box was invaded. Men indebted to Mrs. Annandale for dinner, or who hoped to be, dropped in. Orr got up and went out.</p>
			<p>The second act began. There was an alternating chorus. During it Amneris sat mirroring her beauty in a glass. Presently her voice mounted, mounting as mounts a bird and higher. She was joining in the incomparable duo that ensues. It passed. A march, blown from Egyptian trumpets, followed, preluding the dance of priestesses which precedes the tenor’s return. As that progressed the leader of the orchestra shook like an epileptic. From his own musicians, from those on the stage, from chorus and singers, he drew wave after wave of melody, a full sea of transcendent accords that bathed Sylvia with harmony, filtered through her, penetrating blissfully from fingertips to spine.</p>
			<p>Delightedly she turned to Annandale. The visitors had gone. Orr was entering. In his bulldog face was an expression vatic and amused.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he resumed, seating himself at Sylvia’s side, “she is billed as Dellarandi, but I knew her as Marie Leroy.”</p>
			<p>Sylvia started, her lips half parted, her eyes dilated with surprise.</p>
			<p>Annandale bent forward. “What is it?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Amneris, the contralto. Do you know who she is?”</p>
			<p>“I know she is a devilish pretty woman. What about her?”</p>
			<p>“She is the girl whose father was the twelfth juror in your case.”</p>
			<p>Annandale, who had been standing, literally dropped with astonishment in a chair. But Sylvia was insatiable. She could not ask enough, she could not get the answers quickly enough in reply. Orr, however, knew very little, odds and ends merely that he gathered in the lobby, summarily that the girl had married Tambourini, the music teacher, and was regarded as destined to be one of the great queens of song.</p>
			<p>So interested were all three that the third act was barely noticed. It took the melting beauty of the final duo to distract them from the debutante. But the witchery of that aria would distract a moribund. It was with the bewildering loveliness of it in their ears that they moved out from the box.</p>
			<p>“Terra addio!” Orr repeated from it as they descended the stair.</p>
			<p>“No, not addio,” said Sylvia; “that poor girl may have said farewell to many hopes, but there are other and better ones for her now. I feel that she must have suffered terribly, and because of that suffering we should acquit her of what she did.”</p>
			<p>“That is the verdict, is it?” said Orr.</p>
			<p>“That is my verdict,” Sylvia answered. Then touching Annandale’s arm she looked up at him and added, “It is yours, too, dear, is it not?”</p>
			<hr/>
			<h3>THE END.</h3>
			<hr/>
			<h4>PUBLISHERS’ NOTE</h4>
			<p>The publishers beg leave to state that The Perfume of Eros, in serial form, was entitled The Yellow Fay.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
